Paul, sorry, sorry for that delay.
That's right. Okay. So I live in social housing
and it's one thing to try
and get people engaged in local body elections.
I just held two drop in sessions for mayoral candidates
to talk to tenants.
And yeah, I, it got people out and stuff.
So imagine how these, um,
changes are gonna affect these tenants.
They're gonna be massively
infected affected by these changes.
Now, when I moved house in 2022, um, I had
to update my details
and I wondered why it was taking so long
to discover they'd lost my details
and there were 900 other people trying
to do the same sort of thing.
So, so what sort of impact is, are these changes going
to have on, um, what's already a problem?
Um, because it seems
that the commission is lacking in resources
as in staff to be able to do this.
Um, I'm on the unpublished role, so I go
through a completely different process.
And so when I had to email my details, it had to go
to a special email address
because, uh, it's restricted access.
So has that been considered?
The other thing is Winston Peter, didn't he hold up the, um,
election in 2017?
So what are we gonna do about that?
Um, because every, you know, every time I vote I have
to cast a, um, special vote and do the declaration stuff.
So those are my concerns.
What sort of effect are these changes gonna have?
Okay. Very, uh, very good.
So just, just be clear, um, you can still vote
because you're doing by special vote, but yes.
With your, um,
because you are not on the official role,
you're on the unpublished role, that means, does
that mean every election you have to go back and confirm to,
but do they send you,
does the electoral commission send you something
or because you No.
On the un No, I have to go. They won't.
No. Um, not the local does. Yeah.
With the local B elections, I had
to request the papers. Yeah, because
You, The council already knew who I was.
Right. It was pretty easy. But yeah.
So I'm just looking at our officials there.
We will pick that issue up of the, particularly your issue
is around the unpublished role.
How, how is that expedited? Yeah.
Because otherwise everyone on the unpublished role has
to make sure for every time they wanna vote, they go, you
Have to do a special declaration and, and stuff. And, um,
And does that involve a JP or, um,
Um, no, I just have to fill out the same,
but I had to get somebody to witness the local body
Election stuff. Yeah. Who, who has
to witness?
That's what I was getting out. Um,
I went to the council
and one of the officers came out,
I made two phone calls and said, go to the council.
Alright. Hey, very good. Any other questions?
No, that was, but I think it's really useful.
Yeah, very useful. You're the first person
that's addressed this issue, so Yeah.
Thank you very much. It's one of these nuggets
that you come across, which, um,
so very grateful you turned up in person.
That's why came in. Andrew. Thank
You. How many people know about
This? Now we've got, um,
sorry.
We do have a question from, uh, Ms. Lee Melissa?
Uh, sorry, it's actually not a question.
It's just, uh, a comment in regards to,
um, unpublished roles.
Uh, the electoral commission does send out notification
saying that, uh, for the local, uh, elections, they need
to request the voting papers from the council.
And also, uh, your witness can actually be people
that actually live with you.
Like a family member can actually witness it.
Well, if you don't live with it, you want,
you've actually gotta go and find a complete stranger.
So it's not as easy as some people think it can be quite
hard, especially with social housing
and, you know, you just don't know what you're meant
to do and stuff, so, okay.
That is something you guys need to consider.
Yeah. Aaron, I'm glad. Thank
you for bringing it to our attention.
Yeah. Alright, um, now we have got a number of people, um,
and Nui trustees, please.
Hello. So now apologize for being late.
Uh, you probably heard we had some technical issue.
Um, so, but we're eagerly
looking forward to your submission.
Yes, thank, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, I sat through the technical issues,
so it was interesting, so no one could hear me,
but everybody was talking, so it was great.
So look, Nati RI welcomes the opportunity to, um,
present our submission on the electoral amendment bill,
making amendments to the Electoral Act 1993.
Nati Ri as always, always endorses any ways
to improve the timeliness
and efficiency of electoral administration
and changes that strengthen the integrity of electoral law.
However, despite the intention of the Bill Nati,
URI has serious concerns relating to key aspects
of the bill, including removing the right
to enroll in the 13 days prior to the election,
including the right to enroll on the day itself, um,
the ban on voting for people in prison, especially within
that three year period, and setting barriers around food
and drink and entertainment within a hundred
meters of the voting place.
And we also raised the issue of raising, um, uh,
the threshold of anonymous donations.
We also advocate, advocate for the inclusion
of lowering the voting age to 16
following recent international examples
and publicly policy statements
and positions now being expressed around the world,
perhaps unprecedented.
We are fearful and expressed our concerns in respect
of the government's lack of attention
to the recommendations arising from the Ministry of Justice
and the government's attorney general Judith Collins,
who had advised that the bill would be in
breach of the Bill of Rights.
Section 12. When the Attorney General is ignored in respect
of the Bill of Rights, the guardrails of democracy start
to be dismantled.
We ask that you pause and you think about this.
In a world that is currently surrounded
by political gestures, this is a time when we should stand
strong and uphold our Bill of Rights
more strongly than ever before.
Overall, Nati advocates for changes that promote the right
to vote rather than the strict the rights of a community
to exercise one of the most sacred actions of our democracy,
which is that right to vote.
The Crown is responsible for upholding obligations under ti,
ensuring manano our democratic rights are upheld the right
to vote and contest free, fair,
and regular elections must remain at the center
of any election process.
We note the comments from the 2023
Independent electoral review.
The Crown must redress past breaches,
actively protect Maori electoral rights,
and provide equitable opportunities for Maori
to take part in elections.
Decades of systematic breaches by the Crown have resulted
in consistently lower rates of Maori voter engagement
and participation.
The Crown must do better, not our words,
but somebody else's.
We see no explicit move
to uphold the rights expressed above.
Um, so there's, there's nothing in this bill
that actually improves the position.
In fact, it's likely to do the reverse for us.
Nati Nu calls out the actions
that are undermining our ability
to particularly participate in the forthcoming
and general election.
In 2026, the right to vote up
and on the day of election ensures full
participation in the electoral process.
The right ensures fair and adjust society,
and also ensure the crowns upholds the ability
of electoral rights.
Removing this right is a significant and backwards step.
The number who could be disenfranchised will be substantial
within changes being proposed.
The electoral commission report on the election per past
election noted that over 110,000 enrollments
occurred on the day of the election.
Why would you, as a select committee be recommending
to parliament that you disenfranchise this
number of citizens?
The Attorney General's report specifically demonstrates
that this change will further disen, disenfranchise
Maori Asian Pacifica and youth voters.
We also know that the most affected
by this change will be Maori Pacifica and Ranga Tahi
and whanau who often move frequently rent.
And those that are transient, these are the hardest to reach
through education campaigns and the like.
That means we can predict
that there will be a substantial number
of people not properly enrolled when voting commences,
who will lose the right to vote, um,
and their vote will not be counted.
Maori Pacific already have already groups
with lower participation rates.
They need all our support to
participate in an election process.
The bill does nothing to enhance this position.
While there may be some administrative benefits,
and I heard the previous discussion, I think, um, in terms
of turnaround of results, reducing eligibility
for timeframes, processes
and efficiency cannot trump voting rights.
The approach actually defies logic in our view
and a decent argument in an open and decent society.
At the end of the debate,
and I know you will have heard a lot,
and I know you've heard a lot of legal submissions as well.
This bill does one simple thing.
It will disenfranchise over 100,000 people from
potentially voting next year.
This bill also extends the ban vote voting ban
to all people in prison.
Mm-hmm. Nty considers that again,
once these proposed changes, um, will breach the uh, bill
of rights and tar rights,
we say this drawing upon finding established
by the high court, the Supreme Court,
and the Waitangi Tribunal Maori will be disproportionately
affected by this bill being overrepresented in
prison populations.
This will exclude more
of our population from participating in democratic processes
and further alienating them from community
and civic responsibility.
A great example previously was put to you,
if someone was in prison for one month,
why would we wish to do that?
If we want to reconnect those in prison with society
and provide a plan for reintegration, we need
to retain their right to participate in democracy.
Disenfranchise should not form the part
of someone's punishment.
The bill proposes to prohibit the provision of food
and drink entertainment within 100 meters of polling places.
Nati Rooney considers the provision
of Kai can be positive means to further engage
with the community and participate in voting.
Voting should be accessible, not restrictive.
Barriers often ignore tikanga and reduce inclusion.
For Maori, the ability to gather share kai
and support whanau to vote together is part of Tonga
and Mana banging the banning.
This is culturally insensitive.
Removing these supports risk further reducing voter turnout.
The proposed proposed provision really just looks
mean-spirited if the truth be told without any evidence
of issues and concerns.
Overall, briefly, we note the change in donation threshold
for reporting party donors and adjustments.
And we recognize this is minor,
however, to account to account for inflation.
But this is, this is a significant change
and it does potentially send the wrong signal about
openness and transparency.
Raising the threshold
for anonymous donations reduces transparency
because our whanau already struggle to see fairness
in the pol in politics
and weakening accountability risks increasing
mistrust in the system.
Finally, we touch on our ranu tahi,
our already disengaged from politics.
If we want succession
and true future leadership, we need more pathways
for Orang Tahi to participate, not fewer.
The independent electoral review in 2023,
general election recommended lowering the voting age.
Voting at 16 means a higher turnout for elections.
Overall participation is critical for our democracy,
for both central and local government.
Nati Rooney therefore recommends lowering the voting age
to 16 and evidence supports this change.
16 year olds are just capable of making informed decisions
as their counterparts who are 18 years old.
Lowering the voting age could also improve improved
participation based on emerging
research from other countries.
And we consider allowing the routing age will be consistent
with engaging with a group, a group
that often deal feels disenfranchised.
We thank the committee for listening
to our submission today.
Yep. Now Mihi noi.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Young, any questions from anyone?
Um, look, um, do you, have you got a question? Yes, please.
All right. One from City White. Brad,
Thank you very much.
I'm very sympathetic to your vote 16 suggestion.
But just today I'd like to ask you, um, whether you've had
feedback from, um, your members as to
whether people voted on
or near the election day
and updated their enrollment at that point.
Um, uh, whether, you know, whether this restriction
of the registration deadline would affect many
of your people or maybe not.
Um, look through you, Mr. Chairman.
Most definitely they would.
Look, we have, we don't have anecdotal evidence.
We have real evidence of people turning up on the day, um,
largely because it becomes them front
and center of what they're dealing with, where 13 days prior
to people are busy, they have different priorities,
life just doesn't catch up with them.
So we actually do see that.
And we saw a number of people whanau gathering.
One decides to vote often they'll take the others into the
voting place with them to vote
and realize that they need to update and enroll.
So it's really important
that all options are kept open for our people.
All right. Thank you. Thank you Mr. Young, uh,
very good submission.
Right. Uh, we gotta move on, unfortunately.
Um, Karina Brown, uh, from E two, uh,
we remember by Zoom, aren't we?
Yes. Okay, Ms. Brown, hopefully you can join us.
Hello. Nice to see you. Great.
We've got, um, 10 minutes, so a bit late.
We've, uh, had technical issues. Okay.
Yep. Not a problem. Yeah, so Kiata,
so I'll leave plenty of time for questions.
Um, our main, we just want to reiterate, um,
what was discussed by the Crown law is that, um, the,
since 1993, people have been able to actually enroll
to vote, um, during the advanced voting period.
Um, and for a lot of our people, um, education is an issue.
And that fact is they, they look at things differently.
They don't necessarily look at tv.
Their lives are so busy
that they don't follow education campaigns,
and it becomes an entrenched view.
And so even the last two elections, some
of our people did still didn't realize
that they could actually enroll on, on the day.
They were saying, there's no point in me voting now, um,
I I I never got a chance to enroll,
and it's now a polling day.
He would say, well, no, you can now, to actually now say
that they, for 13 days out, they couldn't,
these people just won't get to vote.
And we know as a a, a union, um, we tell, you know,
we assist our members getting to the vote,
not not asking them how they vote,
because that's their democratic right to choose and vote.
And we actually, um, our membership, um,
is everything from ACT supporters to, um, to, uh,
minor parties that you, you wonder why like, um,
Tubby Hanson and Christchurch Central,
Christchurch Central Elections, um, and,
and so a number of them where we get them
to the polling vote booth 'cause they're sure they're
enrolled, they are not,
because for lots of different reasons,
they've changed addresses.
Um, they have missed the, the envelope,
the mail hasn't got to them.
Um, they, they never don't have mailboxes anymore,
and there's no real way to get to them.
For whatever reasons we, when we take them during
that period, they're not enrolled.
And we are really concerned that this is such,
is gonna be a big disenfranchisement of people enrolling.
And why would we stop people having their
democratic right to vote?
That's the basic thing.
As a, as a person who's a New Zealand citizen, is the right
to be able to vote to decide on who is gonna be your future
and stopping them for no reason other than the factors
that it's gonna be an administrative process
to make it quicker to count there.
As the Crown Law said,
there were other ways you could mitigate that.
We could actually change the rules so
that actually when a special vote arrives on the
day, on day, it arrives.
It can be open, it can be verified,
it can be checked just like a normal vet.
Then it just goes into the normal process of being changed
that the vote would then just be able to be counted
on the day because it's already been checked
to be a legitimate vote.
And if they, they are, and they've been enrolled.
And so it would reduce the amount
of vote special votes you'd have to have on the day
because you'd actually be doing it
every day that they enroll.
And I think that's a, a, a much better way
of doing it then it's just saying, no,
you can't enroll on the stay, you've lost your right to vote
because all we're gonna do is disenfranchise people
and create a generation of, of, um, voters
who will be really frustrated with the system
and will actually end up getting more unenrolled non-voters
because they'll say, what's the point?
I wanted to vote and I wasn't able to.
And I really am concerned
that we are gonna stop people wanting to vote.
And so I said, we, we talked about prisoners and all that,
but my main thing I wanted to highlight today was
that definitely that, um, the reality is that, um, people
need to be able to vote
because we can't disenfranchise them.
And people really do choose to, um, take some a while
to tre entrench changes to the system
and they won't realize they can't.
And they will try and enroll in those 13 days
and then get really frustrated. Thank you.
Right. Uh, the Honorable doctor we wants to grew
Grill you. Yeah.
Good to see you there.
Um, and hey,
you still used the phrase our people at one point.
Yeah. Um, you talked about their voting, how they struggle
to, you know, get their, can you just give us a snapshot of
who your people are, what kind
of education they might have, what kind of jobs they do?
So, um, we, our union, we cover everyone from, um,
from care and support workers, cleaners, um, right through
to miners and, um, aircraft engineers.
We actually, um, have, um,
we are largest private sector union that has members,
Few number of, uh, people new to New Zealand.
Yes, we have, uh, a number of migrants have said,
and as, as as our population, we have a lot
of, uh, migrants.
We, uh, especially in our construction industry
around the Filipinos, um,
and the cleaning industry, we have a lot of, uh, Filipinos
and Indians who work in the care and support area.
So we actually have a real broad range.
And when I'm saying our people, it's not about, you know,
any, any political persuasion.
It's for the fact that they actually feel that they have a,
it's ensuring that they get the right
to vote because that's what we believe in.
Okay. I've got a question from Mr. Hamilton from him.
Thanks. Thanks Chair. Yeah.
Question, just, just right around your comments around, um,
you know, people being disenfranchised if they can't vote on
the last day, I mean, every, everything's gotta cut off.
If you catch a bus, you gotta get it on time.
You go to school, you get there on time, you go to work,
you gotta start at set time.
All we're doing is moving that set time.
Why do we, why do you say it's disenfranchising when
what it's doing is holding up the whole country at the back
end of it when we're actually trying
to streamline the process for the majority of people?
Well, I think you can streamline the process without
actually stopping people with the right to vote.
I mean, yes, you're saying, um, yes they can catch a bus
to go to work, but that bus timetable has been set
for absolutely ages.
And often when bus timetables change, people miss buses
and they get, and they miss work and they don't get paid.
And the same thing's gonna happen with the voting.
People have actually, they have actually had, since 1993,
they've had the ability to vote up till the
day before election day.
Some people still think that's when it cuts off.
Now, even though if the last two elections they could enroll
on election day, people are entrenched with their view
of how, how they should do it.
They know what they're meant to do.
They've got to this period of time to actually enroll.
Just like at work, you know, you have to be at work
by eight o'clock and you do that
suddenly if something you changes without,
you're suddenly gonna have an education process.
How people have different streaming views now,
they don't actually see education.
It's a lot harder to get people out.
We're gonna go into every workplace
and tell every person individually.
The reality is it's a lot harder these days.
'cause see, we haven't been able to get across to them the,
that you can actually enroll on election day now.
And that's been two elections.
So what happens is, first time we have an election
and that says you actually can't roll for 13 days.
Bang, you're gonna so many people who aren't,
who aren't gonna pick up what that means to them
until they go in and try to vote.
I mean, if you're gonna say you're gonna do it, you know,
we're gonna do it in two years, you know,
two elections time, and we're gonna slowly bring it in,
you know, so that next, next time, you know,
they we're gonna, for the first election,
we're gonna cut out the elect, you know, polling day one.
'cause that was one we didn't like.
We'll turn back to that one. Yes.
But I think just banging it in,
people aren't gonna pick up the message
and then they're gonna get disenfranchised. Okay.
So so three to three to six months isn't long enough,
but six years is, is what you're suggesting.
What I'm saying is it's taken six years so far
and we still haven't got everyone yet.
Understanding Polling day was able to be enrolled.
Thank you. What I'm saying is, yeah.
Hey, thank you. Um, thank you Ms. Brown.
Um, good submission
and you've done 'em before, so that's very good.
Hey, thank you for joining us this afternoon.
Thank you. Right now we've got
Charlotte Evans by phone.
Is that right? Ms. Evans?
Have you, uh, if you're available, uh, feel free.
Uh, hello? Hello?
Sorry, it was asking to unmute Charlotte Evans.
Yeah, can you hear me? Ah, right, thanks.
Yeah, figured it out. Um, yeah, should I start?
Yes, please. Okay.
So, um, to start with, I'd like to refer back to a couple
of points from my written submission, just briefly.
So the proposed changes to enrollment have been presented
as an update to the law,
but far from an update, they're really a reversion
to an older and,
and frankly, worse approach, taking us back to the eighties.
Um, another particular concern I've had is that, um,
kicking people off the unpublished role when they're
sentenced to prison is outright dangerous since it may be
very difficult for 'em to get back onto it afterwards.
And the bill would do that since those people would have
to freshly enroll
and reapply for the unpublished role, um,
upon leaving prison, which should be a difficult
circumstance to do that.
And so it could be exposing them to physical risk,
having their address out there again, um,
by violating prisoners' right to vote.
Uh, the bill would also create a first incentive
for governments to criminalize people who oppose them.
Uh, in fact, we already see the risk of this in the, uh,
the summary offenses,
the demonstrations near residential premises amendment bill,
which, uh, I believe is also
before this committee introduced less than a month
after the bill we're discussing here, um,
which would criminalize protest outside politicians' homes.
And that provides for a three month prison sentence.
So the essence of
that bill should be a major red flag for this bill.
And then this bill contains a one two punch
of automatic enrollment updates
and then enclosing enrollments before voting begins.
Uh, there's a particularly dangerous combination
that could see people disenfranchised in the case
that their enrollment details have been incorrectly
altered without their knowledge.
And then this is only discovered when they go to vote.
They find that they're not on the electoral role
or they're on the role in, in some other district.
I'm not be sure if they'd be able to
find that out at that point.
Um, and, uh, yeah, by that point it would be too late
to do anything about it because enrollments would be closed.
So that's a real risk.
Uh, overall may be tempting to see the bill of the case
of tilting at windmills or a solution looking for a problem,
but it's actually worse than that.
And for a start, nothing ever gets better as a result
of making it more difficult for people to vote.
I think that's pretty well known.
Um, but there's also the combination of that with the, uh,
lack of consensus behind the bill, which shows
that this bill does politicize the electoral process
and even the appearance
of the government having a finger on a scale
should be unthinkable.
But for this bill to have made it this far, it shows
that our democracy and our democratic norms, uh,
already more brittle than that.
And this makes the bill particularly dangerous.
Um, so yeah, what's the benefit of the bill?
I mean, a small delay in the final count being returned is
really not a problem.
And furthermore, the lion's share
of delay in forming a government tends
to be the coalition negotiations.
In any case, the time the final count takes
isn't all that relevant.
And not to mention it's far more important
to have a fair election than to have a quick one.
So the fa the final remaining possibility is
that this is about cost
and, uh, the general policy statement in the bill mentions
that it will help to, uh, manage the cost
of future elections.
And now this is a bad reason.
In any case, we can really see just
how bad it really is in this case.
Uh, the largest supported cost savings I could find in
relation to the proposed enrollment deadline change was an
estimate of $2.4 million, uh,
from the regulatory impact statement.
And based on the 2023 turnout of two point, uh,
eight 6 million voters, that's 84 cents per voter, I think,
I think everyone would agree
that you can't put a price on free and fair elections.
Uh, but this bill would put a price on free
and fair elections and that price is somewhere
below 84 cents per voter.
So I asked the committee
to recommend that this bill not pass.
Uh, thanks. I think we might have brief time for questions.
All. Thank you Ms. Evans. Anyone question? No. Alright.
I think, um, oh, we got one from Mr. Stevenson, I think.
Yeah. Thanks. Thanks for your submission.
Hopefully you can hear me okay.
Uh, just, um, I, I did read your submission
and you referred to, you were worried about some of these,
uh, the automatic address updates.
And then I read in your submission, you're, you're,
you're worried too, people's email,
like if we go a bit more electronic,
people's email addresses might change
phone numbers, et cetera.
But don't, don't be run into the problem of someone may not
not receive, um, a, a letter.
They also may not receive an email.
Like, at the end of the day, don't we have
to rely on one communication method getting to people or
Yes, you do, but the problem here is the automatic updates
leaves a channel for the information
to change without the person knowing it's changed.
They don't know. They think
that their current information hasn't been altered when in
fact it has, and then the,
the communication doesn't reach them at all.
Um, and, um, you know, like an old email address hanging
around with a government department
and mistakenly being sent out as a new one.
For example, I, I don't even know
how many email addresses over the years I have
that are no longer active
or ISPs University, um, all kinds of things like that.
So, yeah.
Okay. All right. Thank you.
Hey, thank you. Um, Ms. Evans. It's very good.
Um, now we'll have to move on, unfortunately,
but now we've got Danya, young Yang, um, Daniel
with it, uh, by Zoom.
Zoom, yeah. Hopefully
Tina.
Um, Tina, uh, Mr. Chair.
Um, I guess we'll just get right into it.
Yes. We've got five minutes.
Yes. Um, so
called, my name is Dan and my au is from Taiwan.
Um, my great auntie immigrated to Tama Makoto
with her young family in the 1980s,
and we feel super lucky, um,
and fortunate to have three generations here now.
Um, I strongly oppose the electoral amendment bill
for many reasons, many reasons
that have already been mentioned by other speakers today.
Um, I just wanted to talk of what Graham was saying before,
and Karina and Charlotte, um, they've put in a lot of stats
and hard work into their submissions.
Um, the bill, um, as it stands proposes
to institutionalize barriers
and obstacles for us to exercise our voting rights.
Um, I'd like to talk more about
how this bill threatens accessibility
and exposes much larger flaws in our system.
Um, I was born in Tamaki Makoto
and have spent my whole schooling life under the New Zealand
education system.
I've been fortunate enough to receive higher education at
the University of Auckland and a UT
and through 17 years of formal education and schooling.
Not once was I taught
or encouraged to learn about our parliamentary system,
electoral processes or constitutional rights.
Um, prior to this submission, I also spoke
with my friends and peers.
Many of these friends have also received high education
and gone through the entire education without any kind
of class or course that teaches us about civics.
If we want to encourage a democratic society
where everyone participates, why do we not have systems
that teach us about it?
If there is an existing lack of civic education
and competency, why are we creating more barriers for people
that are trying to engage?
I think we, um, mentioned a few of these stats earlier,
but that almost a hundred thousand people enrolled
to vote within the last 12 days before election day in 2023.
If we have this data, we should not be entertaining a policy
that would wipe these votes.
If we have reports from the Attorney General demonstrating
that one, this bill will further disenfranchise marginalized
groups and use,
and that two, the bill fundamentally
violates the Bill of Rights.
We are not using this information to make informed choices.
We begin to care and invest in a system when we feel
that it represents us and cares for us in return.
When you have a bill that blatantly suggests
to remove voting rights for prisoners, you are telling
that group of people already facing issues with the system
that they are not important.
When we look at our youth,
who will someday become the leaders for our,
our grandchildren, do we wish to be the people
who encourage or discourage them?
Um, I had a little look on the Electoral Commission website
and saw that the Orange Man says Our democracy is
better with you in it.
And I believe and hopes that the,
you should include everyone in our generations ahead.
Hmm. Hey, thank you for your lovely submission.
Right, thanks. And now we've got a question
from Ms. Walters.
Um, thank you so much for your submission.
I was just curious whether you think
that people are talking about this issue out there in terms
of their knowledge of the proposed changes or not?
I think it's a deeply, um,
I think it's a huge conversation
that's come up in our workplace and also in our communities
and amongst our au um, even
with my sister's partner and their children
and the parents at school.
I think it's definitely a wider issue
that everyone is engaged in
and trying to have some kind of say in. Yeah.
Thank you. Alright. Hey, thank you. Thank you.
Have a lovely afternoon. Thank
You. You too.
Okay. Cheers. Bye-bye now.
Um, Ethan Kohi, I think it is.
Oh, you've been waiting patiently. Please come to the front.
Right. I think we've got five minutes with you, so,
um, rip into it.
Thank you. Uh,
My name is Ethan.
I am a year 13 Wellington College student. Oh, fantastic.
Very avid interest in politics. Um, how old are you? 17.
17? Yeah. Yeah. Um,
and I thank this committee for the opportunity
to have my first all submission to the bill today.
Um, I'm always submitting as an individual
who sees the purpose, aims and intentions of this bill.
I believe that holistically the electoral amendment bill is
a positive step towards creating more robust, efficient,
and integral electoral system that's capable
of handling future population growth in New Zealand.
Despite the, some aspects of this bill should be reworked
to better serve the interest of all New Zealanders.
One of the largest discussion points
of this bill has been talked about a lot today has been the
introduction of a 13 day voter involvement deadline.
Goldsmith previously told press reporters
after the bill's first reading that the ability for people
to enroll or update it in electoral details up to
and including on election day has placed too much strain on
the system, um,
which was a direct contributing factor towards the
final vote counts.
Taking three weeks to be released by left to mission,
which was seen as one of the longest delays on record
between election day and the final book return.
This is a result of the rapid increase.
This, this is also a result
of the rapid increase in the number
of people casting special votes.
I believe that the move to introduce a 13 day voter
enrollment deadline is a positive
and effective, um, change that will help the elector
to commission reduced the amount
of last minute enrollment applications,
therefore supporting the need
to minimize the delay in the release
of final election results.
Despite the efficiency this will bring,
concerns have been raised about the possible
disenfranchisement on more than a hundred thousand New
Zealanders from voting regulatory impact statement
or RIS published by the Ministry
of Justice in March this year.
It's indicated over 500,000 people cast special votes in the
2023 general election.
The core reason for these special votes came as a result of
between 300,000
to 350,000 people either not enrolled entirely
or not enrolled in the correct address or an election day.
Maori Civica and Asian groups are affected predominantly
by these changes 'cause they face disadvantages in housing
employment due the fact those like lower incomes
or educational qualifications.
This causes many people in these ethnic groups
to move fiscal court justice on a more frequent basis.
These movements cause them to forget about
updating their electoral details
and hence this bill made disenfranchised
them for this reason.
My first recommendation to this committee is
that dedicated support mechanisms are introduced
through automated systems that work alongside agencies such
as real ME or inland revenue, um,
to automatically update a voter's registration details when
they change their residential address.
This form of cross agency in integration would be
advantageous 'cause it would me, sorry.
Um, 'cause it would not merely reduce the number
of special vaults, but also uphold the open
and accessible democratic processes.
New Zealand stands for while simultaneously increasing
public trust in the electoral system.
The electoral amendment bill adequately addresses the act
of treating, which occurs when voters are manipulated
by others to vote a certain way by providing them
with incentives such as food, drink,
or education for, sorry, or entertainment.
The inability for this practice
to be adequately prosecuted has allowed a greater amount
of corruption to occur behind closed doors.
For this reason, I believe that the proposed prohibition,
um, for of a hundred meters on free food, drink
or entertainment, strengthens the integrity
of New Zealand's democratic processes
by eliminating avenues which have been used
to unfairly influence voter behavior.
However, I appeal to this committee
to clearly state within the legislation
what constitutes unlawful treating
and what constitutes legitimate civic engagement.
For example, community events, um, that provide refreshments
as part of cultural practice
or initiatives designed to simply encourage people
to participate in democracy by creating a clear
and well-defined distinction.
It'll allow the New Zealand public
to understand the boundaries of the law,
strengthen protections against undue influence,
all while preserving the inclusiveness of our democracy.
I like to next address the proposed blank ban on prisoner
voting per proposed in this bill,
new Zealand's ground the system
of governance in universal democratic participation.
I believe that this move, um, is dangerous
'cause it undermines the very foundation
of democratic inclus inclusivity in New Zealand.
New Zealanders have a civic duty
to follow the laws of our nation.
This is so that order is maintained
and society can function in a fair and just manner.
New Zealanders also have a civic duty to vote
and a democracy that gives power to the people.
It is important that the government party
or parties are an accurate representation of public opinion.
A complete ban on prisoner voting equally forfeit
every prisoner's right to vote.
In reality, uh, there is a large spectrum
of offenders in prison for a variety of sentence lengths.
In 2015, the New Zealand high court rule that a previous
complete ban on person voting passed in 2010 was
inconsistent with the, with the Bill of Rights Act.
This struggle, the previous labor led led government
to partially repeal it
for person serving less than three years.
Um, New Zealand Attorney General de Honorable due
of current echoed the high court 2015 ruling in a June, 2025
report saying that a blanket ban
or personal voting will disenfranchise those
who have a legal right to vote and cannot be justified.
I believe that a balance should be struck
for upholding the right for people to vote,
while also holding people accountable That act actions do
have consequences and privileges within society will be
stripped away if you step outta line.
Therefore, I recommend to this committee that the right
for prisoner to attain the right to vote
is while imprison assessed on a case by case basis.
This can be decided upon act sentencing hearings in front
of judges at courts.
This approach would ensure
that decision has tailored seriousness of the offense
and lengthened the sense rather than applying a one size
fits all, ban, a person's aggravating factors are already
considered by judges while determining sentences.
And so by extending the discretion to include the retention
or loss of voting right,
would be a seamless integration in the justice system into
the protection of democratic rights.
As I mentioned in my written submission,
democracy was formed to encourage
and provide an avenue for our members of society
to engage in a nation's political aspiration and direction.
Okay, we're just about there. I think Nathan, right?
Thanks. Um, we're just about outta time.
Hey, thank you very much for coming.
Do you want turn around and get a photo?
Um, or you're videoing it?
Do you want take a photo and then, uh, we've gotta move on.
Unfortunately, if you'd like a photo. Do you want a photo?
Not with you in it, Duncan.
Right. Hey, thank you for coming. Uh, fantastic.
Uh, submission, uh, we've read it and it's comprehensive.
So good for that. Thank right.
Now we've gotta go to Andrew del by Zoom.
I'm just conscious we're getting a bit late
'cause of our technical issue.
Mr. Riddell, nice to see you.
Hopefully you'll take off your sound restriction. Cool.
Alright, we've got five minutes. Sorry for the delay.
We've had some technical issues. Okay.
Um, Kira, this bill is a mix of the good, the missing
and the reprehensible the good, such as formally
recognizing a 12 day advance voting period, um,
or the ancillary ways
that the electoral commission will be allowed
to keep the electoral roles more up to date.
The missing I identify for in my submission, um,
Consultation with all political parties in Parliament
before reducing or extending the advanced,
the advanced voting period, not just consultation
with the Prime Minister and the leader of the opposition.
Um, the need to extend Section 199 A,
which is about publishing false statements from, uh,
two days before polling day.
It needs to be extended out to two days
before the advanced voting states,
but that seems to have been overlooked.
Um, spending limits, um, missing is a donations regime
recommend, um, comprehensive approach recommended
by the independent electoral review, um, on spending limits
and on donations.
Um, instead the bill proposes changes to the donation regime
that further reduces the visibility
and accountability of donations.
And so to the reprehensible removing enrollment process
during voting period, changing
what has worked perfectly well over the, over 11
of the last 12 elections,
including all the MMP elections we've had,
and stopping prisoner voting even
after the Supreme Court says, no, don't do it.
My contention is
that the proposed amendments do not facilitate participation
in or main maintain confidence in the electoral system.
Encouraging participation
and maintaining confidence in our electoral system is
fundamental to the operation of our democracy.
To repeat the amendment would take us back
to the electoral law sometime before 1990.
It is, as the Attorney General's borrower report,
confirms a reduction in our rights to vote
and exercise in disenfranchising people.
At paragraph seven of my submission,
I record a concern about the contempt the Minister
of Justice has shown for public review and input.
Changing the electoral law is changing a fundamental part
of our democracy and needs as close
to consensus as possible.
Yet that has not been attempted.
Um, there was ample time
between receiving the various reports
and making final decisions on the content
of the Electoral Amendment bill for the Minister of Justice
to seek the views of the opposition political parties
and the public before the changes were sought.
Instead, as is far too common
with this coalition government,
the minister avoided public input
until the select committee stage,
which is, um, after the
decisions have been made.
And we only get five minutes
very token effort at public input.
This is an attempt to gerrymander the 2026 election
to disenfranchise a substantial subset of voters
to effectively deny their right to vote.
And I would be talking hundreds of thousands of people here.
Right. Thank you Mr. Riddell for that submission.
Um, very comprehensive. Um, any questions, members?
No, your sentiments are echoing.
Many that have gone before you, but well put Yeah.
Forcibly put as well. So thank you.
Thank you Mr. Adell. That's very helpful.
Right now we're gonna move to the Law
Association of New Zealand.
Um, I'm sorry. No, we've got Simon. Have we?
Oh, sorry, Mr. O'Neill. Sorry about that.
Good, Good afternoon. Can I, am I coming through now?
Yeah, you're, uh, excellent. Okay. Thank you.
Um, I'm, I'm sorry.
Um, but I'm probably just gonna subject you again
to the same points you've already heard for most of the day.
But, um, especially the last gentleman, um,
who brought out some very good procedural points.
Um, the government makes our laws, um,
and I don't, we, we don't dispute
that we might not always appreciate them or agree with them,
but that's our system of democracy.
But I think when we're changing laws, especially laws
that relate to how we create our governments, we need
to take a bit of extra care.
We need to make sure we are doing it properly.
Uh, and I don't,
there's no massive time imperative on this legislation
that has to be pushed through so, so, so quickly.
Um, I'm a professional.
I like when I do a job, I like to know I've done it properly
and I, I think, you know, we're, we're, we're all the same.
Um, and I'm also very evidence based.
I've worked in public policy.
I'm not a lawyer, but I work in law.
Um, now I guess I'm very evidence based
and one of the phrases I've got very used
to saying over a career in government, other places as,
sorry, boss, I got that wrong, or, we are wrong.
We need to change our, our stance on this.
And that's evidence-based.
And I've read through a lot on this
and I'm not seeing any evidence that really supports,
uh, a lot of these changes.
Um, if there was some evidence out that showed that
disenfranchising, um, people who are in prison
actually has an effect either on her rehabilitation
or on the electoral process, it makes it a better thing,
then great, let's get on and do that.
But there is no evidence that says that, uh, for the last
19 93, 32 years, um, I think as one
of the previous speakers says, uh, 11
of the last 12 elections, we've allowed people to enroll
and vote on voting day.
Okay. The world hasn't ended.
Yes, I accept there might have been a slightly larger pucker
factor at the last election
'cause it was a, a bit of a cliffhanger.
Um, but that's, that's life in the fast lane.
I, I sort of, um, put forward that, um, if you don't want
that sort of thing, perhaps you're in the wrong game.
If you, if you're getting into politics, that's just life.
Like how, how things happen.
Um, but I don't think we should be doing anything
that makes it harder to, for people to do something
unless there's really good reasons for that.
Um, and I'm just not seeing in this, I would love to say go,
well, gee, I've, I've been educated,
I've learned some things I didn't know,
and this is a good piece of legislation.
I don't think it is. And I, and I really oppose it.
Um, I do like that we are looking at how we, um,
scrutinize donations, but I don't think we are taking it
nearly far enough.
I think we need to be looking at, we, we need to be, um,
subjecting this to greater, not less scrutiny,
maybe reducing the amounts that are required to be declared.
By which, I mean, lesser amounts have
to be declared looking at services that are offered,
not just financial donations.
Um, I understand there was one person,
the last election had the services
that a private jet to get round New Zealand.
Um, I think that's, that's more of a concern
to me than a sausage sizzle outside the election hall.
Um, thank you that, that's all I've got.
I know it's the end of the day. You've had a long day
hearing probably all the same points,
but, um, that's may I think we need to do more work on this
before it pre progresses. Thank you.
Alright. Thank you for participating.
I do have a, uh, question from Celia Wade Brown.
Thank you. Um, thank you Simon.
Um, still, we're still interested in all of this.
Um, I'm interested in particular in the donations aspect
and I wondered if you thought
what the dollar value threshold should be.
Obviously you don't agree with going up from 5,006
and I wondered
how much you thought the donations ought to be.
Um, I've seen the, the, sorry you've got, that wasn't one
of the questions I was sort of I'd read up on, um, but
It's in your, it's in your submission I think.
Yeah, no, no. I I did have, I did have it.
I didn't think it would be one of the things
I'd get a question on.
Um, I think, you know, for me, um, a maximum of 5,000,
but I'd be happy to take it down to a thousand.
'cause to me that's a lot of money.
If someone's putting five a thousand dollars into, um,
into a party or something to do with an election.
I think that's, that's enough interest for me as a,
as a just a normal kiwi that needs
to be tracked and recorded.
Um, yeah, I mean, IIII think it should be a really,
really, thank you. Yeah. Yeah.
Alright. Hey, thank you Mr. O'Neill.
Very good part of democracy.
Glad you participated in, it's very helpful. Thank
You. Right
now we moved to the law, uh,
association of New Zealand.
I think Jeffrey, uh, Beford is joining us.
Hello? I should be unmuted,
but sorry, my camera doesn't appear to be operational that
No problem. Alright.
We've got 10 minutes
with you anyway. Oh, there you are.
Excellent. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, members of the committee, I am presenting on behalf
of the law Association, uh,
public Administrative of law committee.
And this is a very contentious bill
and a very difficult one, uh, to submit on
because, uh, from what I've been hearing from the, uh,
submitters in, in the last half hour, I can imagine
that you have ringing ears in relation
to certain proposals in this bill.
And what I can say is on behalf of the,
the Law Association is that, uh, as, as lawyers,
you are just forced really to, to, to be cognizant
of a few things that we have to defend.
Uh, number one is the right to vote.
Number two is democracy. Number three is the rule of law.
And this electoral bill does give rise
to serious concerns on all three issues.
The law association, uh, submission
follows, uh, very closely the report
of the Attorney General.
Uh, that is an excellent report and I think, uh,
although you'll all be very familiar with that report,
it might actually be of benefit to have a
very brief legal articulation
of the very, uh, uncomfortable statements
that are contained within that report.
Now, I, I'm just gonna, uh, if you'll indulge me
for a minute or two, I'm just gonna read aloud a a few of,
uh, our attorney general's, uh, sage comments
to paragraph 31.
I nevertheless consider that the specific proposal
for a 13 day registration deadline appears
inconsistent with the right to vote in Section 12
for the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 32.
The right to vote is engaged
because the proposed registration deadline has a potentially
disenfranchising effect
that is not a material
The principal reason for introduction
of a 13 day registration deadline is to speed up completion
of the vote count following polling day
41.
In regard to direct impact,
it is the estimated 3,400 people
who would be potentially disenfranchised.
No, I'm just, just summarizing there, uh, a, a statement
that 3,400 people would be potentially disenfranchised,
uh, by this proposal.
And now that's at 41 of, of the Attorney General's report.
And 3,400 people being potentially disenfranchised is
by itself reason enough
to seriously reconsider this proposal.
One person being unnecessarily disenfranchised is reason
enough to seriously reconsider the proposals in this bill.
It is very uncomfortable seeing numbers like this
in relation to the word disenfranchised.
We are talking about the most fundamental democratic rights.
It appears to be being surrendered to either cost saving
or administrative, uh, convenience.
Neither is a justification for trampling
or overwhelming or removing
or whatever you wanna say about it.
Uh, it is contrary to our most precious
and important right in our democracy.
The Attorney General's report goes on to note that
it is likely that the registration period will have a
disenfranchising effect that is not insubstantial.
And this is talking in relation to the indirect impact
of the registration deadline.
Now, of course, it's, uh, anyone's guess as to
what the true impact of that proposal would be,
but from, uh, 42.2 of the report, um,
we can see numbers of, uh, 97,000 people
to 134,000 people.
So there's very significant numbers,
and by my brief calculation based on the number of people
who voted in the last general election, it appears
to be about 3.5%
of the full voting population.
Uh, so that is a very significant
potential percentage
and impact on the election in an environment in an MMP
environment where 3.5%
of the vote potentially being disenfranchised, is, uh,
incredibly significant, uh, in relation to
what could be the end of the day outcome of an election.
So, uh, one of the gentlemen may, uh, submit
as just beforehand, made a submission
that this proposal would gerrymandered the 2026 election.
Uh, that is incredible.
And I didn't hear anyone on the, uh, committee, uh,
say anything to, uh, shoot down that submission.
Right. Can we take by the relative silence
of committee members that this is agreed,
this is very significant.
Uh, now look, there, there are of course,
because this is a, a balanced report by, um, Judith Collins,
uh, consideration of the factors that, uh, go the other way
and to mitigate the potential effects of this, uh,
voter deadline, uh, proposal.
Um, however, I think the, the point is that it,
it's necessary from the position of, uh,
the law association, uh, to make a submission really, uh,
about what fundamentally is going on with the spill and,
and how it, uh, will impact on,
on fundamental rights
and how, I guess, um, it may potentially be perceived.
So you, you've, you've got questions that are,
are perhaps more politics than law and,
and you, you might just wanna ask or,
or consider is, is this a fair proposal?
Is this, is this right? Do we feel comfortable about this?
Are we happy for people to show up on election day
and then discover that they cannot vote?
And how many thousands
of people are gonna be disenfranchised on
that in, in this way?
And is that the New Zealand we want?
Is that the best we can do?
Um, look, I, I think I,
I know you all have had a very long day, so I, I think, uh,
I would at this point invite any questions or, or
Discussion. Alright.
Thank you Mr. Beford. Um, right. Thank you.
No, we're going here to, I think
that you said first, isn't it?
Right. Fair enough. Ms. Boulders.
And then, uh, we'll go to, um, Dr. Webb.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
And thank you very much for your submission,
your comprehensive submission.
Um, I wonder if the association has any comment about the
journey This bill has traveled through the house thus far.
Um, just in light on your highlighting the, uh,
section seven report, which I think is important in my view,
that's about putting the house
and select committee on notice in terms
of carefully examining the bill.
Now, at the moment, the bill was referred
to select committee for four months in one day,
which is less than the normal period
that bills are considered
by select committee ordinarily six months.
Um, and does the law law association have a view on that?
Well, that's not something that, uh, we've, we've really,
uh, considered.
I mean, one of the advantages
and disadvantages of, uh, our unal system
as we are the fastest gun in the West, uh, when it comes
to produ, the ability to produce legislation immediately,
but there are, are always concerns.
Yeah. Uh, when, when a, uh, standard
and predictable process is not followed.
Um, so given the,
the substantive content of this bill and, and,
and the problems that it, you know, that, that,
that we are discussing, uh, yeah.
There, there's absolutely merit in your comment, uh,
uh, about, about process.
Uh, it just makes something
that makes us all uncomfortable worse.
Okay. Hey, thank you for your contribution this afternoon
and your, um, your, uh, written submission.
Very helpful. Thank you very much. Thank you.
Right now I think we've got our last, um, submitter.
Is that right?
Uh, okay.
Are you here with us?
Yes. Yes. Hey, nice to see you.
You're our very last one today. So we are all ears.
Um, thank you. Um, I dunno if you can see us, we seem
to be on screen. Yeah.
You got blurry. Yeah, I'm sure. What's happening there?
Um, so my name's Anna and this is, um, Maxine,
and we are presenting on behalf of, to Kda, New Zealand.
I'm on behalf of Dr. Kirsty Barber and Ena Jones.
Um, we're, um, to Kda is a social enterprise committed
to democracy, sustainability,
and building cultural capacity
for organizations, communities.
And Maori toura means a flourishing
where all can thrive.
Um, we strongly oppose the electoral amendment bill.
Instead of making democracy stronger,
this bill puts up barriers
that will stop thousands of New Zealanders.
From voting, we want to highlight three key concerns.
First, removing the right to enroll on election day.
We work with young people across the wika.
Many are not currently vol enrolled
or have recently moved right now.
They can still show up on election day
and participate under this bill.
They would be locked out. That means thousands
of young people, many voting
for the first time will lose their voice.
Second cutting 13 days from the elector, uh,
special vote period.
Special votes are disproportionately ma uh, used
by Maori Pacifica, Asian,
and younger voters, communities
that are already underrepresented shortening.
The timeframe is a blatant, is blatant voter suppression.
Third reinstating a blanket ban on voting
for all people in prison.
The high court has already found this inconsistent
with the Bill of Rights and the independent electoral review
recommended restoring the right to vote.
Denying this right undermines rehabilitation
and disproportionately impacts Maori communities
Like others. We've
noted this bill ignores the advice
of the a Attorney General, the Minister of Justice,
and the electoral reform panel.
The justification simply doesn't hold up.
The delay in forming government last year was due
to coalition negotiations, not counting of special votes.
Our recommendations are clear.
Abandon this bill,
implement the evidence-based reforms in the 2023 independent
electoral review and res resource, the electoral commission
to enable participation not restricted.
In closing, we return to Ang when we speak
with young voters who want to, uh, uh, engage
but aren't enrolled yet.
It's devastating to think
that this bill could take away the very first
chance to vote.
That is not democracy.
This bill is unnecessary, undemocratic
and harmful. We urge you
Not to proceed.
Oh, that's very powerful.
Now we've got honorable Dr. Duncan Webb.
Good. Um, thank you for that, um, submission.
You've made some comments about
who you think will be disenfranchised.
Um, do you think that that is, I mean,
the word gerrymandering came up in the last
submission, you might have heard it.
Do you think that's an intentional, uh, disenfranchisement
of people who might vote for a different government?
Or do you think it's just a disregard of certain groups
of people or something else?
Um, yeah, sorry, we didn't, um, hear that, um,
from the last speaker, but, um, as, as we ha
as Toda has said in their submission, we, um, do consider
that this, uh,
bill will have a disproportionate effect on communities
that don't, um, you know, are already, um,
underrepresented in, in voting.
So, um, regardless of the intent,
it's just gonna have that impact.
And we don't think that that's, uh, that's justified.
We want more people to vote. Not, I'm sorry.
I'm sorry if I didn't speak clearly enough.
My wife was we way away.
My question was whether you think
that is politically motivated? I don't
Not, that's not, that's not for, that's,
that's, that's not for them to,
That's an entirely legitimate question for a,
It's not for them to opine. So
You've, you've identified particular groups of people
who are being disenfranchised.
That's all right. Do you think there are political leanings
are, uh, in a particular direction
and that's why it's being done or not?
Well go on. I think there's,
talk about further quiet chair.
No, no, no. That's, that's
Been clearly I've asked, I've asked an entirely legitimate
question, not for you to edit that been
Clearly political. Please talk about
We're politicians Please talk about in the sense of
what it means for I ranu free speech.
Please let them, let them comment.
Um, I'm very interested in what you're saying about orang.
That's the main thing.
No, Mr. Chair, I guess
what you're asking is if the bill goes through it will, um,
be more beneficial to the, to current,
the government that's currently in place? Yes, that's
The question.
I mean, that's pretty obvious,
but whether, whether, what's
Your evidence is not Mr.
Chair, can I ask a question then?
Yeah. Okay. I What's your evidence for that?
Well, no, you're just looking at the communities
that this bill is gonna disadvantage
and they traditionally vote left.
That's it. Right.
Well have you, what's your evidence
though that that's true?
Oh, for goodness sake. We know that.
I, I haven't got it at my fingertips,
but you know it, don't you?
No, I think you're, that's a spec. You're speculating.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Um, any other questions? No.
Hey, thank you, both of you, uh,
for your contribution very last today.
Um, and, uh, thank you for taking the time
to join us at five o'clock at night.
Thank you. Thank You.
Right now that brings the.